.. _sed:

SED Analysis
============

The :py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed` method computes a
spectral energy distribution (SED) by fitting for the flux
normalization of a source in a sequence of energy bins.  The
normalization in each bin is fit independently using a power-law
spectrum with a fixed index.  The value of this index can be set with
the ``bin_index`` parameter or allowed to vary over the energy range
according to the local slope of the global spectral model (with the
``use_local_index`` parameter).

The ``free_background`` and ``cov_scale`` parameters can be used to
control how nuisance parameters are dealt with in the fit.  By default
this method will fix the parameters of background components ROI when
fitting the source normalization in each energy bin
(``free_background`` = False).  Setting ``free_background`` to True will
profile the normalizations of all background components that were free
when the method was executed.  In order to minimize overfitting,
background normalization parameters are constrained with priors taken
from the global fit.  The strength of the priors is controlled with
the ``cov_scale`` parameter.  A larger (smaller) value of
``cov_scale`` applies a weaker (stronger) constraint on the background
amplitude.  Setting ``cov_scale`` to None can be used to perform the
fit without priors.

Examples
--------

The :py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed` method is executed
by passing the name of a source in the ROI as a single argument.
Additional keyword argument can also be provided to override the
default configuration of the method:

.. code-block:: python
   
   # Run analysis with default energy binning
   sed = gta.sed('sourceA')

   # Override the energy binning and the assumed power-law index
   # within the bin   
   sed = gta.sed('sourceA', loge_bins=[2.0,2.5,3.0,3.5,4.0,4.5,5.0], bin_index=2.3)

   # Profile background normalization parameters with prior scale of 5.0
   sed = gta.sed('sourceA', free_background=True, cov_scale=5.0)
   
By default the method will use the energy bins of the underlying
analysis.  The ``loge_bins`` keyword argument can be used to override
the default binning with the restriction that the SED energy bins
most align with the analysis bins.


The return value of :py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed` is a
dictionary with the results of the analysis.  The output dictionary is
also saved to the ``sed`` dictionary of the
`~fermipy.roi_model.Source` instance which is written to the output
file generated by :py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.write_roi`.


The following example shows how the output dictionary can be captured
from either from the method return value or later accessed from the
`~fermipy.roi_model.ROIModel` instance:
   
.. code-block:: python
   
   # Get the sed results from the return argument
   sed = gta.sed('sourceA')

   # Get the sed results from the source object
   sed = gta.roi['sourceA']

   # Print the SED flux values
   print(sed['flux'])

The contents of the FITS file and output dictionary are documented in
:ref:`sed_fits` and :ref:`sed_dict`.
   
.. _sed_fits:
                
SED FITS File
-------------

The following table describes the contents of the FITS file written by
:py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed`.  The ``SED`` HDU uses
that data format specification for SEDs documented `here
<https://gamma-astro-data-formats.readthedocs.io/en/latest/results/flux_points/index.html>`_.

.. csv-table:: *sed* Output Dictionary
   :header:    HDU, Column Name, Description
   :file: ../config/sed_fits_output.csv
   :delim: tab
   :widths: 10,10,80

.. _sed_dict:
            
SED Dictionary
--------------
   
The following table describes the contents of the
:py:meth:`~fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed` output dictionary:

.. csv-table:: *sed* Output Dictionary
   :header:    Key, Type, Description
   :file: ../config/sed_output.csv
   :delim: tab
   :widths: 10,10,80


Configuration
-------------

The default configuration of the method is controlled with the
:ref:`config_sed` section of the configuration file.  The default
configuration can be overriden by passing the option as a *kwargs*
argument to the method.

.. csv-table:: *sed* Options
   :header:    Option, Default, Description
   :file: ../config/sed.csv
   :delim: tab
   :widths: 10,10,80
            
Reference/API
-------------

.. automethod:: fermipy.gtanalysis.GTAnalysis.sed
   :noindex:


